docs: opamp design doc (#3388)
open-telemetry/otel-arrow: rust/otap-dataflow/docs/opamp.md

# OpAMP Controller Extension

This document describes the mechanism through which dataflow engine can be

> configured via an embedded OpAMP Agent, implemented as a controller extension.

Reviewer: nit: Link to OpAMP spec repo.

Author: :+1: fixed in 3a5d6ea62

## Problem

> As the machinations of those desiring to control telemetry flow become more

Reviewer: nit: these are good motivations behind OpAMP itself and is better written in the OpAMP repo itself. For this repo, this is more about - OTel already defines a agent management protocol, and df_engine should adopt it.

Author: 4c0cbd0b4

sophisticated, the concept of building some fleet management becomes
increasingly appealing.

System designers, probably, will wish to implement their own remote control
plane without having to design, from scratch, a new protocol for sending
configuration or receiving status.

OpAMP provides such a protocol, and the solution to this problem will be to
add the capability for the dataflow engine to act as an OpAMP agent, receiving
configuration from some remote server while emitting its state and health.

## Background

### OpAMP

See [Full OpAMP documentation](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/opamp/) for
more information.

OpAMP (Open Agent Management Protocol) is a vendor-agnostic network protocol

> existing as part of the Open-Telemetry ecosystem. It specifies a mechanism for:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
existing as part of the OpenTelemetry ecosystem. It specifies a mechanism for:
```

Author: fixed in 4164072c4

- _Servers_ to configure remote _Agents_
- Agents to report their status to the Server
- Management of Agent downloadable _packages_.
- Connection credential management (including client-side TLS)

Agent to Server communication typically happens over a network where the Agent
acts as a client, using either
[WebSocket](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/opamp/#websocket-transport) or
[plain HTTP](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/opamp/#plain-http-transport)
(plain meaning standard HTTP request-response model, not HTTP over plaintext).

The messages exchanged are protobuf serialized `AgentToServer` and
`ServerToAgent` messages.

> Find [proto message definitions](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opamp-spec/blob/main/proto/opamp/v1/opamp.proto).

Reviewer 2: We should probably state that generated bindings from the official OpAMP proto should be used where possible, or explicitly list any supported subset. That will reduce the risk of subtle drift from the upstream OpAMP spec.

Author: Sounds good.  Added a note about this in 9f2aedf2e

### Controller extension

OTel Controller Extensions allow custom implementation of logic that interacts
with the engine control API to reconcile configuration and report status. They
are configurable at runtime and can be linked at compile time (similar to
processors, exporters, receivers, etc.).

See [#3263](https://github.com/open-telemetry/otel-arrow/issues/3263) and
[#3281](https://github.com/open-telemetry/otel-arrow/issues/3281).

## Scope

This design document only covers the implementation of OpAMP for exchanging

> engine configuration and pipeline status.

Reviewer: could use some rephrasing.
1. Lets state explicitly if this is most one-way - df_engine reporting its status/health to a opamp server, or does it cover accepting config from opamp server and acting on it.

Author: :+1: c3903b4f6 reworked this sentence to make more explicit.

OpAMP has additional capabilities such as server directed management of
connection/credential settings and package management (which could be used
for dynamic loading of WASM components, for example). These considerations
are left as future design work.

## Design Principles

> ### Control Plane Implementation Agnostic

Reviewer: not sure how this title reflects our design.. Opamp is already agnostics to how the control is implemented - it can be any control plane, as long as they speak OpAMP protocol, we work with them.

Author: Even if the control-plane uses OpAMP protocol, it could be implemented in such a way that it makes certain expectations of the agent. One example I was thinking of when I wrote this is that perhaps some control plane implementation expects certain attributes to be available in the `AgentDescription`, or otherwise for the `instance_uid` to be populated in a specific manner. 

My intention with this principle is to state that we'd like to implement the agent in such a way as to be amenable to these expectations. In practical terms it means exposing flexible options to configure how these fields are populated.

The goal of this implementation is simply to expose a mechanism through which
remote control plane authors can configure an instance of Dataflow Engine via
OpAMP, however the implementation of the server (how it resolves configuration,
identifies, DFE instances, manages state, etc.) is outside the scope of the
design and is left to the whim of its creator.

The goal is intentionally to solve the use case of being the interaction point
for some abstract, theoretical control plane. To wit, design points should
be agnostic to the control plane implementation while providing requisite
flexibility.

## Configuration

The URN used to identify the controller extension will be
`urn:otel:controller_extension:opamp` and it can be configured as follows:

```yaml
# example DFE config
engine:
  controller:
    opamp:

>       type: urn:otel:controller_extension:opamp

Reviewer 2: The config shape here should use `engine.controller.extensions.<id>` consistently, matching the later example in section `Agent Identity` and the controller extension model. Otherwise this looks like a dedicated `engine.controller.opamp` field rather than a registered controller extension.

Author: fixed

>       config:

Author: fixed in 93f36a0a6

        # The URL of the OpAMP server, including the scheme and path.
        #
        # The scheme will be used to determine whether communication
        # is done over WebSocket or HTTP. E.g. use "ws://..." for websocket
        # and http:// for http.
        #
        # Required
        endpoint: ws://127.0.0.1:4320/v1/opamp

        # mTLS configuration
        #

>         # Optional: if not provided, messages will be sent as plaintext

Reviewer 2: It may be useful to specify TLS validation semantics here: server trust roots, whether system roots are included by default, whether `insecure_skip_verify` is allowed, and that partial mTLS config, cert without key or key without cert, must fail validation before startup.

Author: Added a section in 27b8d85ca

In terms of configuration, I figured we'd use the same config struct we use for the OTLP exporters: https://github.com/open-telemetry/otel-arrow/blob/main/rust/otap-dataflow/crates/config/src/tls.rs#L49-L92

        tls:
          # Trust settings for verifying the server certificate
          ca_file: "./my-certs/ca.crt"
          include_system_ca_certs_pool: false

          # Client identity for mTLS (these make it mTLS instead of just TLS)
          cert_file: "./my-certs/client.crt"
          key_file: "./my-certs/client.key"

>         # Configuration for heart-beat timing.

Author: e05945190

        #
        # Optional (default = 30s)
        heart_beat_interval: "10s"

        # Options for configuring exponential backoff for initial Websocket

>         # connection.

Author: 3d9e23cf7

        #
        # Each exponential backoff computed as
        # min(last_backoff * factor, max) + jitter
        #

>         # Optional

Reviewer 2: I'd suggest making the retry/backoff contract more explicit: capped exponential backoff, jitter behavior, reset behavior after a successful connection, and how `Unavailable` responses interact with request retry versus full reconnect. This will make implementations more predictable.

Author: Added in 1278df9f0. FWIW, some of this is also in the OpAMP spec https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/opamp/#throttling

        connect_retry:
          # initial backoff
          #
          # Optional (default = 250ms)
          initial: 1s

          # maximum backoff
          #
          # Optional (default = 30s)
          max: 30s

          # exponential backoff increase factor
          #
          # Optional (default = 2.0)
          factor: 2.0

        # Options for configuring exponential backoff retry for requests.
        #
        # Used in the event that the initial request to the server fails or
        # when the server responds with an error response type Unavailable but
        # does not specify retry_info in the response details
        #
        # Optional
        request_retry: {
          #  ... same exponential retry options as connect_retry above
        }

        # Options for engine reconciliation
        reconcile:
          # timeout for reconcile - Optional (default = 30)
          step_timeout_secs: 10

          # timeout for pipeline drain - Optional (default = 30)
          drain_timeout_secs: 10

          # timeout for pipeline delete - Optional (default = 30)

>           delete_timeout_secs: 10

Reviewer 2: Could the reconciliation config also document `delete_missing` behavior? In a full desired state reconciliation model, `delete_missing: true` would mean that any currently running group or pipeline absent from the remote config is drained/deleted. With `delete_missing: false`, omitted groups/pipelines are left running, which makes the remote config behave more like an additive or partial update.

Author: Updated in 6523cdc22

If this were set to `false`, wouldn't the server be unable to signal to the agent that it needs to shutdown a pipeline that it previously?

Author: Thinking about this a bit more - I guess they would use some commands to shutdown the pipelines.

        # Manually specify an instance_uuid.
        #
        # Optional - if not provided, a UUID v7 will be generated

>         instance_uuid: "..."

Reviewer 2: For stable fleet identity, should the spec include an optional persisted `instance_uid`/`instance_uuid` **file path**? Generating UUIDv7 is a good default, but persistence across process restarts seems important for control plane state continuity.

Reviewer: +1. I think I also left this comment somewhere.

Author: Added to design doc in 4eec833c5 and added a followup issue to actually implement this behaviour:  #3423

        # Attributes describing agent
        #
        # Optional
        agent_description:

>           identifying_attributes:

Reviewer: should we include Resource/Entity of the engine itself by default here instead of expecting users to do it? They have already likely configured it in another section - could opamp get it from there?

Author: You're thinking that we should get this from like the `engine.telemetry.resource` config value eh? Yeah I guess it'd be convenient if the didn't have to make the user configure this twice.

Do you think we should make this behaviour configurable?  e.g. if we did something like:

```yaml
agent_description:
  identifying:
    include_telemetry_resource_attributes: true # defaults to true
    attributes: {
      # ... key/value pairs of custom attrs for overrides/extra attrs
    }
```

            "attr.key": "attr value"
            # ...

          non_identifying_attributes:
            "attr.key2": "attr value"
            # ...
```

## Protocol Implementation

### Client Behaviour and Message Flow

#### 1. Initial Message

The client begins by sending an initial `AgentToServer` message sending its
full state, including the following fields:

- `instance_uid` - from config if present, otherwise generated
- `sequence_num` - zero if first message in sequence
- `agent_description` - from configuration if present, otherwise omit

> - `capabilities` - list of supported capabilities:

Reviewer: This should come from config right? The operator setting up df_engine should be able to tell which capabilities to expose - some operators might just want to report health and nothing more. Some want to report effective config. Some want to accept remote config and apply etc.
Some users would want to use mTLS, but in the case it fails, it still would to report the bare minimum health to the opampserver.

Just some thoughts.

Author: Interesting -- yeah I hadn't realized that the agent could/should be impelmented in such a way that capabilities should be toggled by config, but that makes sense as a use case.

Indeed, the docs actually recommend specifically that accepting a remote config should be opt-in https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/opamp/#opt-in-remote-configuration

Updated the design doc in b38670669 to specify that each capability should have a config toggle and created an issue to track that work: https://github.com/open-telemetry/otel-arrow/issues/3424

it should handle:

- If the message is in any way invalid (invalid protobuf, unexpected type of
  websocket message, etc.) it should ignore the message
- If the `instance_uid` field does not match the agent's `instance_uid`,
  then ignore the message
- If the message contained an error in the `error_response` field:
  - If the type is `Unavailable`, the client should disconnect the TCP
    connection, backoff exponentially, and retry the last request
  - Otherwise, ignore the message
- If the field `agent_identification` is set, update the `instance_uid`
- If the field `remote_config` is set:
  - If a valid config can be found in the config map and the hash does not
    match the last applied hash, reconcile the new config while sending
    appropriate replies (see section below on Engine Config Reconciliation)
- If the flags `ReportFullState` and/or `ReportAvailableComponents` are set,
  the next reply to the server should contain full state or available
  components. If a new config is being reconciled, these can be included on
  the message that is sent to the server letting it know config is being
  applied. Otherwise, send an ad-hoc message immediately reporting these

>   fields.

Reviewer 2: This section could define which message handling errors are non fatal versus session fatal. For example, a valid `ServerToAgent` message with a mismatched `instance_uid` can be safely ignored and counted as a rejected message, because the transport itself is still healthy. In contrast, malformed protobuf bytes or an unsupported WebSocket frame type may indicate a broken protocol exchange, so the client should either close the session and reconnect or clearly document why it continues.

Author: I reworked the error handling notes in 6b4b426fc

> In contrast, malformed protobuf bytes or an unsupported WebSocket frame type may indicate a broken protocol exchange, 

Currently the implementation in https://github.com/open-telemetry/otel-arrow/pull/3410 actually just ignores these and keeps exchanging messages on the same connection. I suppose it's true this could indicate a broken protocol exchange, so I've updated the docs to say that we should ignore these and will update behaviour in the impl PR as well.

In any case where a message is ignored (especially in error cases), appropriate
telemetry should be emitted.

> ##### Send periodic heart beats

Author: c89992539

> The client should send periodic heartbeats to the server at regular intervals.

Reviewer: are these also `AgentToServer` itself?

Author: Yes these heartbeats are `AgentToServer` messages

These should contain:

- `instance_uid`
- `sequence_num`
- `capabilities`
- `health` - computed from current pipeline status (see section below on
  Health Resolution).
- `remote_config_status` - computed from current pipeline status (see section
  below on Status Resolution)

> - `custom_message` - full pipeline status from status snapshot

Reviewer 2: The heartbeat already includes `remote_config_status`, could it explicitly state that heartbeats should carry the last known remote config hash and status even when no new config is being applied? That gives the server periodic confirmation that the agent is still running config hash X, not only that the agent is alive.

Author: Sounds good, added in 252c65363

#### Error Handling

On TCP Errors or HTTP errors, the client should backoff, retry connecting, and
commence exchanging messages by reporting its full state (see section above on
Initial Message for what to include).

### Agent Identity

The `AgentToServer` message contains an `instance_uid` and an
`AgentDescription` with identifying attributes. These are used by the server
to identify the agent.

Different control plane implementation may have different mechanisms for
identifying the client depending on their unique deployment scenario. As such,
it is not specified how agents should identify themselves nor how to compute

> agent description - these parameters will be configurable.

Author: 69879bac0

```yaml
engine:
  controller:
    extensions:
      opamp:
        type: "urn:otel:controller_extension:opamp"
        config:
          # ...
          instance_uuid: "<uuid>"
          agent_description:
            identifying_attributes:
              attr.key: "attr_value"
              # ...
            non_identifying_attributes:
              attr.key2: "attr_value"
              # ...
```

If `instance_uuid` is not specified, a uuid v7 will be created.
Note that this logic only applies to bootstrap resolution of the

> `instance_uid` - the server may respond with a new agent identification to

Reviewer: I think we should have an option to persist this identity and use that if we crash and restart? Else each start comes up with new id, which is not likely the desired outcome?

Author: :+1: https://github.com/open-telemetry/otel-arrow/pull/3388#discussion_r3537447817

override the [initial value](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/opamp/#servertoagentagent_identification).

If `agent_description` is not configured, the `agent_description` field will
not be set on the `AgentToServer` messages.

### Engine Config Representation

The server should supply the engine config as JSON, embedded within the

> `ServerToAgent.remote_config.config.config_map["desired_state"]` which contains

Reviewer: "desired_state" - I don't find such a key in the opamp spec. Can you link to the relevant OpAMP spec line?

Author: This "desired_state" key isn't part of the OpAMP spec. This `remote_config.config.config_map` field has type `map<string, AgentConfigFile>`, so I figured we need to decide on a key to use in this map, and "desired_state" seemed reasonable.

Author: https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/opamp/#configuration-files

> an  `AgentConfigFile` message.

Author: ffbbd1bcc

The `body` of the message should contain the JSON serialized
`otap_df_config::engine::OtelDataflowSpec` and the `content_type` field should
identify that the body is JSON serialized.

```rs
ServerToAgent {
    remote_config: AgentRemoteConfig {
        config_hash: <hash>
        config: AgentConfigMap {
            config_map: HashMap {
                "desired_state": AgentConfigFile {
                    content_type: "application/json",
                    body: ...
                }
            }
        }
    }
}
```

The `config_hash` computation is performed by the server. The client does not
depend on any particular implementation or algorithm, but the server should
endeavour to choose the hash such that each new config has a unique hash value
without collisions. The agent does not calculate hashes, it only stores and
compares them. This is

> [recommended by the OpAMP spec as well](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/opamp/#calculating-hashes).

Reviewer 2: In addition to comparing hashes in memory, it may be worth specifying whether the last successfully applied config hash should be persisted. That would let an agent avoid unnecessary reconciliation after restart when the server resends the same config (stretch goal).

Author: Yeah sure we could do that.

By "restart",  do you mean that the controller extension would be restarted without the engine restarting? If this were, by contrast, the process restarting, since we wouldn't have persisted the full configuration last received from the server, we'd simply restart from the bootstrap configuration that was passed via arguments at startup right?

### Engine Config Reconciliation

When the OpAMP agent controller extension receives a `ServerToAgent` message,
if it contains a remote configuration whose `config_hash` does not match the
last applied config hash, the new config will be applied to the engine.

The agent will try to deserialize the remote config as an `OtelDataflowSpec`.
If deserialization fails, it will respond to the server with an `AgentToServer`
message with a `remote_config_status` containing a `FAILED` status.

> If deserialization of the new remote_config succeeds, the agent will immediately

Reviewer 2: It may be worth explicitly requiring the client to send an `APPLYING` `remote_config_status` response immediately after the remote config has been parsed and accepted, but before calling `ControlPlane::reconcile_engine_config`. Reconciliation may take time because it can create, update, drain, or delete pipelines. Sending APPLYING first lets the server know the config was accepted and work has started, rather than treating the agent as silent or stalled.

Author: Yes sounds good. In fact, that's what this paragraph was trying to state should be done, it just wasn't very clear. I added a new sentence in 55cd72c4b to make it clear that the `APPLYING` message should be sent before calling this method.

reply to the server with an `AgentToServer` message with a `remote_config_status`
containing an `APPLYING` status, and it will then use the DFE `ControlPlane` to

> reconcile the engine config.

Reviewer: does the engine already support changing settings such as downsizing total memory/size etc, without process restart?
I guess I am asking if we plan a supervisor concept too?

Author: Yes as far as I know we support changing the resource policies. We have tests for this anyway:
https://github.com/lquerel/otel-arrow/blob/5a733bae9089b400a2a484b59740e7f065dd09ee/rust/otap-dataflow/crates/controller/src/live_control_tests.rs#L484-L652

which will be exposed as configuration on the controller extension.

When this function returns, the agent will use the
`Result<EngineConfigReconcileStatus>` to generate another `AgentToServer` message
with status indicating the result of the reconciliation of the remote config.

### Status Resolution

#### `RemoteConfigStatus`

The `AgentToServer` message will contain a
[`RemoteConfigStatus` message](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/opamp/#remoteconfigstatus-message)
for this purpose which contains high-level information about the applied remote
config.

Before receiving any configuration from a remote server, the agent will always
set the status to `APPLYING`.

Otherwise, the status will be derived from the pipeline status snapshot
returned by the control plane. Note, this snapshot contains a `PipelineStatus`
object, which contains `PipelineRuntimeStatus` for all instances of a pipeline,
which contains a `PipelinePhase`.

The remote config status will be derived from the snapshot using the following
rules:

- If any instance of any pipeline has phase is `Pending`, `Starting`,
  `Draining`, `Updating`, `RollingBack` or `Deleting` the remote config status

>   will be `Applying`

Author: 9397ae90f

                    }
                }
            }
        }
    }
}
```

The health status (`status` field) for each component can take on the following
values: `starting`, `running`, `stopping`, `stopped`, `failed` and `degraded`.

When resolving the status for the pipelines, the following logic will be used:

- If any instance has phase `Deleting` or `Draining` the status will be
  `stopping`
- Otherwise if any instance has phase `Pending`, `Updating`, `Starting` or
  `RollingBack` the status will be `starting`
- Otherwise if any instance has phase `Failed` or `Rejected` the status will be
  `failed`
- Otherwise if all the instances have phase `Running` the status will be
  `running`
- Otherwise if all the instances have phase `Stopped` or `Deleted` the status
  will be `stopped`
- Otherwise the status will be `degraded`

When resolving the status for engine's pipeline groups, the resolution logic
will use the following rules:

- If any pipeline has status `stopping`, the group status will be `stopping`
- Otherwise if any pipeline has status `failed`, the group status will be
  `failed`
- Otherwise if all pipeline has status `stopped`, the group status will be

>   `stopped`

Author: 2ccb692c8

- Otherwise if all pipelines have status `running`, the group status will be
  `running`
- Otherwise the group status will be `degraded`.

### Custom Messages & Capabilities: Full Pipeline Status

> The implementation will advertise a custom capability representing its ability

Reviewer: nit: Add a small explanation why we cannot leverage the ComponentHealth and need a custom one here.

Author: sounds good, added in 3246758be

to provide the full configuration status via a custom message.

> Proposed capability FQDN: `io.open-telemetry.otap-dfe.pipeline-status/v1`.

Reviewer 2: As we renamed the project OTel Arrow Dataflow Engine (at least for now...), I suggest to use `io.open-telemetry.arrow-dfe.pipeline-status/v1`

Author: :+1: fixed in e7847ac75

Custom message example:

```rs
AgentToServer {
  capabilities: ["io.open-telemetry.otap-dfe.pipeline-status/v1"],
  custom_message: CustomMessage {
    capability: "io.open-telemetry.otap-dfe.pipeline-status/v1",
    r#type: "report",
    data: [ ... ]
  }
}

> ```

Reviewer 2: [medium term] The custom status capability should probably have a stable JSON schema. Even if the payload mirrors an internal status snapshot initially, documenting the wire shape avoids coupling external controllers to internal Rust model drift.

Author: Sounds good - documented as a documentation followup  https://github.com/open-telemetry/otel-arrow/issues/3420

The payload here is the bytes from a JSON serialized status snapshot (e.g., the
`HashMap<PipelineKey, PipelineStatus>` returned from
`ObservedStateHandle::status_snapshot`).

## Telemetry

> ### Metrics

Reviewer 2: We should consider adding metric attributes and latency metrics here: outcome, error kind, transport, reconnect attempt, reconciliation duration, remote config status, and whether config was skipped because the hash was unchanged.

Author: Added to design doc in 122be36bb

> The controller extension implementation should produce metrics:

Reviewer: nit: something to track if the ws connection gets lost and reconnected?

Author: Sounds good, added in 70345ddf1

- Count successful `AgentToServer` messages transmitted
- Count failed `AgentToServer` messages transmitted (due to TCP or HTTP errors)
- Count `ServerToAgent` successfully handled
- Count `ServerToAgent` messages unsuccessfully handled (due to instance_uid
  mismatch, invalid proto encoding, etc.)
- Count remote configs successfully reconciled
- Count remote configs unsuccessfully reconciled

## Future Work

Future design work - potential areas worth exploring to extend the initial
implementation described in this document

### Client Settings

OpAMP has the capability to configure connection settings both between the
agent & server, and between agent and some external OTLP receiver to which the
agent should export its own internal telemetry.

In the case of DFE, the settings between agent & OTLP receiver are not useful

> because this can be configured via the internal telemetry pipeline, the

Reviewer: ITS is not quite there for Metrics yet. lets leave a TODO to account for that here.

Author: Sure can add a TODO. What's the gap w/ ITS metrics? Live configuration of the internal telemetry pipeline isn't supported or something?

configuration for which is contained in the `ServerToAgent`'s `remote_config`
message.

The connection settings _could_ be used to control the connection/
authentication between the agent and server, using inspiration from the OpAMP
spec (
[this section](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/opamp/#connection-settings-management)
). A followup design can be created for this.

### Imperative Command Capability

This design assumes the server will specify the remote configuration in full.
E.g. the agent expects to receive the config declaratively.

However, in the future we may want to expose a mechanism for servers to trigger
the ad-hoc creation/reconfiguration/deletion of some pipeline. This could be

> supported through a custom agent capability / custom server message.

Reviewer 2: Even if imperative commands remain future work, it may be useful to reserve a custom capability namespace and a minimal command envelope now. For example, a future custom message could carry `{ "command": "pipeline_delete", "request_id": "...", "payload": { "group_id": "tenant-a", "pipeline_id": "ingest", "timeout_secs": 30 } }`, with responses carrying the same `request_id`, a status, optional result, and optional error. That would keep declarative full-config reconciliation as the primary model while avoiding incompatible custom message shapes later.

Author: Sounds good - I added at least a bit more information about this in 4a737d8b4

### Packages

In [#2973](https://github.com/open-telemetry/otel-arrow/issues/2973) a proposal
was added to have WASM based plugins which implement pipeline components.

OpAMP has a capability for managing Packages that could be used to manage the
availability and provisioning of these plugins.

See [documentation](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/opamp/#packages).

### Server SDK

This design completely abdicates the DFE of the responsibility for creating/
maintaining an OpAMP server. This is the concern of some system designer
looking to manage their own fleet of DFEs. It's not the intention of this
design to prescribe a solution for this, especially given that its unknown
how such a theoretical system will manage/generate DFE config.

However, we can still imagine a world where there are some cross-cutting
primitives that _most_ OpAMP server implementers will need to build. This
includes an HTTP server, possibly with websocket enabled, cert management,
instance_uid and other state management, etc.

> We could consider making this easier by providing an SDK in rust that abstracts

Reviewer: I think the reference implementation in opamp-go is good enough for now. There are some proposals about making a contrib repo for opamp too, for folks to make additional server implementations etc. We could use that, if we chose to (and that contrib exists!).

Author: sounds good, removed suggestion in 7ac9f3d0d

## Design Principles

### Control Plane Implementation Agnostic

The goal of this implementation is simply to expose a mechanism through which
remote control plane authors can configure an instance of Dataflow Engine via
OpAMP, however the implementation of the server (how it resolves configuration,
identifies, DFE instances, manages state, etc.) is outside the scope of the
design and is left to the whim of its creator.

The goal is intentionally to solve the use case of being the interaction point
for some abstract, theoretical control plane. To wit, design points should
be agnostic to the control plane implementation while providing requisite
flexibility.

## Configuration

The URN used to identify the controller extension will be
`urn:otel:controller_extension:opamp` and it can be configured as follows:

```yaml
# example DFE config
engine:
  controller:
    extensions:
      opamp:
        type: urn:otel:controller_extension:opamp
        config:
          # The URL of the OpAMP server, including the scheme and path.
          #
          # The scheme will be used to determine whether communication
          # is done over WebSocket or HTTP. E.g. use "ws://..." for websocket

>           # and http:// for http.

Reviewer 3: Since `http://` is supported here, can we document the plain HTTP polling behavior? Per the OpAMP plain HTTP transport [spec](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/opamp/#plain-http-transport), the server can only send messages in response to the agent's poll, so remote config delivery is bounded by the polling interval. Is `heartbeat_interval` also intended to be the HTTP polling interval here?

Author: comments about http in [7c8b37d](https://github.com/open-telemetry/otel-arrow/pull/3388/commits/7c8b37da23dcedc1f8c7d58da7d95e2e69ea6b09) including that the heartbeat interval is intended to be the polling interval.

If the key is supplied without the certificate, or the certificate is 
configured without the key, configuration will be considered invalid at 
startup.

If the `tls` section of the config is not supplied, messages will be exchanged
in plaintext.

## Protocol Implementation

### Client Behaviour and Message Flow

#### 1. Initial Message

The client begins by sending an initial `AgentToServer` message sending its
full state, including the following fields:

- `instance_uid` - from config if present, otherwise generated
- `sequence_num` - zero if first message in sequence
- `agent_description` - from configuration if present, otherwise omit
- `capabilities` - list of supported capabilities:
  - Reports status
  - Reports Effective Config
  - Reports Health
  - Reports Remote Config
  - Reports Heartbeat
- `health` - see section below on server health
- `flags` - `Unset`
- `custom_capabilities` - list capability to send full state as custom message
  (see section below on custom capabilities).
- `remote_config_status` - status field = `Unset`
- `connection_settings_status` - status field = `Unset`

> - `custom_message` - full pipeline status from status snapshot

Reviewer 3: Should we also list [AcceptsRemoteConfig](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/opamp/#agenttoservercapabilities) here? The design seems to include receiving and applying remote config, so I assume that is part of the initial scope.

Author: Yes, this missing capability was an oversight. Added in a59f4a857 and added AcceptsRestartCommand as well.

message with a `remote_config_status` containing a `FAILED` status.

If deserialization of the new remote_config succeeds, the agent will immediately
reply to the server with an `AgentToServer` message with a `remote_config_status`
containing an `APPLYING` status. This message should be sent before using the DFE 
`ControlPlane` to reconcile the engine config.

The agent will then call `ControlPlane::reconcile_engine_config` which takes as 
arguments various timeouts and options which will be exposed as configuration
on the controller extension.

When this function returns, the agent will use the
`Result<EngineConfigReconcileStatus>` to generate another `AgentToServer` message
with status indicating the result of the reconciliation of the remote config.

### Status Resolution

#### `RemoteConfigStatus`

The `AgentToServer` message will contain a
[`RemoteConfigStatus` message](https://opentelemetry.io/docs/specs/opamp/#remoteconfigstatus-message)
for this purpose which contains high-level information about the applied remote
config.

Before receiving any configuration from a remote server, the agent will always

> set the status to `APPLYING`.

Reviewer 3: Maybe I am missing something, but the initial state should be "UNSET" or "APPLYING" ?

Author: UNSET. fixed in 135a44284
